### Data Governance

#### Key Roles and Correlating Data Governance and Management Activities

The following tables list what data governance / data management
activities central roles in the IDS ecosystem are occupied with, and
what IDS components are involved.

::: tabular
p2.75inp3.14in &\
&\
&\
:::

::: tabular
p2.73inp3.16in &\
&\
&\
:::

::: tabular
p2.75inp3.14in &\
&\
&\
:::

::: tabular
p2.75inp3.14in &\
&\
&\
:::

::: tabular
p2.75inp3.14in &\
&\
&\
:::

#### IDS Data Governance Model

The IDS Data Governance Model defines a framework of decision-making
rights and processes with regard to the definition, creation,
processing, and use of data. While governance activities set the overall
directive of the decision-making system, data management comprises three
groups of activities with regard to the creation, processing, and use of
data. In the IDS context, data governance comprises also usage rights of
data shared and exchanged within the IDS ecosystem. The management of
metadata specifies data about data and comprises both syntactic,
semantic and pragmatic information. This is of particular importance in
distributed system environments that do not rely on a central instance
for data storage, but instead allow self-organization of different
heterogeneous databases. Additionally, data lifecycle management is
concerned with the creation and capturing of data, including data
processing, enrichment, storage, distribution, and use.

The following responsibility assignment matrix (RACI matrix) supports
the allocation of these activities to enable a governance mechanism in
the IDS ecosystem. RACI stands for 'responsible' ,
 'accountable' , 'consulted' and 'informed ' . The focus
lies on the 'R' and 'A' of the RACI matrix, supported by the
notation  'S', which stands for supported.

::: longtable
p1.11inp1.09inp1.05inp1.09inp0.95in

\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
& & & &\
\
:::

The following subsections describe five topics that are addressed by the
Governance Perspective. These topics play an important role when it
comes to the management of data assets.

> something is missing here
