## Governance Perspective

The Governance Perspective of the Reference Architecture Model defines
the roles, functions, and processes of the International Data Spaces
from a governance and compliance point of view. It thereby defines the
requirements to be met by the business ecosystem to achieve secure and
reliable corporate interoperability. This chapter provides an overview
of how central questions of governance are defined on each layer of the
Reference Architecture Model (see section 3). In particular, it
describes how the International Data Spaces enables companies to define
rules and agreements for compliant collaboration.

While the International Data Spaces enables all participants to act in
compliance with negotiated rules and processes, it does not make any
restrictions or enforce predefined regulations. The architecture of the
International Data Spaces should be seen as a functional framework
providing mechanisms that can be customized by the participating
organizations according to their individual requirements.

The International Data Spaces supports governance issues by

-   providing an infrastructure for data exchange, corporate
    interoperability, and the use of new, digital business models;

-   establishing trustworthy relationships between Data Owners, Data
    Providers, and Data Consumers;

-   acting as a trustee for mediation between participants;

-   facilitating negotiation of agreements and contracts;

-   aiming at transparency and traceability of data exchange and data
    use;

-   allowing private and public data exchange;

-   taking into account individual requirements of the participants; and

-   offering a decentralized architecture that does not require a
    central authority.

The Governance Perspective in the context of the IDS-RAM relates to
concepts from an organizational and technical point of view to establish
the development of a healthy and trustful data ecosystem. It supports
collaborative governance mechanisms, so that the common service and
value propositions are achieved, while protecting the interests of all
actors.

As innovative business models and digital, data-driven services require
enhanced data management capabilities, the role of data governance is
increasingly receiving attention. Therefore, the management of data
related resources by means of decision rights, accountabilities, roles,
and ownership makes data governance a fundamental element in the
International Data Spaces ecosystem. To manage data under consideration
of business needs and the existing digital infrastructure, data
governance, being a leadership function of data management, acts as an
enabler for successfully engaging in a collaborative ecosystem. It is
therefore necessary to establish suitable organizational structures and
procedures that determine who makes what kind of decisions concerning
data assets, and which responsibilities and accountabilities are
associated with these decisions.

In this context, organizations are confronted with new challenges.
Innovative, data-driven business solutions often require that data is
increasingly used outside of the organization. This development
transcends organizational boundaries, as internal data is used
externally, and vice versa. At the same time, this creates new forms of
collaboration in data ecosystems. Various actors, such as original
equipment manufacturers (OEMs), suppliers, or third-party vendors
interact with each other and contribute to fulfilling a common value
proposition.

From an internal perspective of one single organization, the execution
and allocation of decision rights for the management and use of data
manifests itself within organizational structures. They ensure that
relevant guidelines and principles regarding data assets are in place
and monitored. However, traditional instruments for assigning decision
rights and accountabilities in terms of data usually do not reach beyond
an organization's borders. Thus, the influence of authority for the
individual actor within a data ecosystem might be limited. The IDS-RAM
addresses this challenge in a federated manner by distributing decision
rights for data governance and management activities to the different
roles in the International Data Spaces ecosystem. It thereby supports
the requirements to be met by the actors within the ecosystem to achieve
secure and reliable interoperability as well as desirable behavior
regarding the use of data.
