### Governance Aspects Addressed by the Different Layers of the IDS-RAM

#### Business Layer

The Business Layer (see Chapter 3.1) facilitates the development and use
of new, digital business models to be applied by the Participants in the
International Data Spaces. It also specifies the roles within the IDS.
Thereby, it is directly related to the Governance Perspective by
considering the business point of view regarding data ownership, data
provision, and data consumption, and by describing core service concepts
such as data brokerage.

#### Functional Layer

The Functional Layer (see Chapter 3.2) defines the functional
requirements of the International Data Spaces, and the concrete features
resulting from them, in a technology-independent way. The IDS Connector
represents the main interface to enable participation in the ecosystem.
From a governance perspective, interoperability and connectivity must be
ensured to support trust, security, and data sovereignty. Beside the
Clearing House and the Identity Provider, which are entities for which
the relation to governance is obvious, also the functionality of certain
technical core components (e.g., the App Store or the Connector) relates
to the Governance Perspective.

#### Process Layer

Providing a dynamic view of the architecture, the Process Layer (see
Chapter 3.3) describes the interactions taking place between the
different components of the International Data Spaces. The three major
processes described in the Process Layer section (onboarding, exchanging
data, and publishing and using Data Apps) are directly related to the
Governance Perspective, as they define its scope regarding the technical
architecture.

#### Information Layer

The Information Layer (see Chapter 3.4) specifies the Information Model,
which provides a common vocabulary for Participants to express their
concepts. It thereby defines a framework for standardized collaboration
and for using the infrastructure of the International Data Spaces for
establishing individual agreements and contracts. The vocabulary plays a
key role in the Governance Perspective because of its relevance for
describing data by metadata in the International Data Spaces.

#### System Layer

The System Layer (see Chapter 3.5) relates to the Governance Perspective
due to its technical implementation of different security levels for
data exchange between the Data Endpoints in the International Data
Spaces.
