# Introduction #

**THE INTERNATIONAL DATA SPACES (IDS) IS A VIRTUAL DATA SPACE LEVERAGING
EXISTING STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGIES, AS WELL AS GOVERNANCE MODELS
WELL-ACCEPTED IN THE DATA ECONOMY, TO FACILITATE SECURE AND STANDARDIZED
DATA EXCHANGE AND DATA LINKAGE IN A TRUSTED BUSINESS ECOSYSTEM. IT
THEREBY PROVIDES A BASIS FOR CREATING SMART-SERVICE SCENARIOS AND
FACILITATING INNOVATIVE CROSS-COMPANY BUSINESS PROCESSES, WHILE AT THE
SAME TIME GUARANTEEING DATA SOVEREIGNTY FOR DATA OWNERS.**

## Goals of the International Data Spaces ##

Data sovereignty is a central aspect of the International Data Spaces.
It can be defined as a natural person's or corporate entity's capability
of being entirely self-determined with regard to its data. The
International Data Spaces initiative proposes a Reference Architecture
Model for this particular capability and related aspects, including
requirements for secure and trusted data exchange in business
ecosystems.

Overall, there are three types of activities in which the work of the
International Data Spaces initiative can be grouped: 1) research
activities, 2) standardization activities, and 3) activities for the
development of products and solutions for the market (see Figure below):

1. The research activities are based on the first Industrial Data Space
    research projects conducted by Fraunhofer. They are being continued
    on a broad scale in a large number of projects. Each of these
    projects makes its own contribution to the IDS-RAM, IDS
    implementations, IDS use cases, and other IDS documents.

2. The International Data Spaces Association (IDSA), a non-profit
    organization, aims at promoting the IDS-RAM in order to establish an
    international standard. To achieve this goal, the Association pools
    the requirements from various industries and provides use cases to
    test the results gained from the model's implementation. The
    standard is intended to materialize in the IDS-RAM itself, but also
    in defined methods for secure data exchange and data sharing
    facilitated by the IDS Connector, the central technical component of
    the International Data Spaces. To ensure the international ambition
    of the initiative, Regional Hubs have been established in different
    countries. In addition, the activities of the IDSA aim at supporting
    the adoption of IDS concepts and technologies in the market.

3. Actors in the market can make use of the International Data Spaces
    standard for providing software services and technology to the
    market. These products and solutions form the operational IDS
    ecosystem. As each offering must comply with the International Data
    Spaces standard, it must undergo a certification process. Therefore,
    the market requires offerings from evaluation and certification
    facilities.

![ Three types of activities of the International Data
Spaces](../media/image10.png)

### Figure 1.1 : Three types of activities of the International Data Spaces

The International Data Spaces aims at meeting the following strategic
requirements:

- **Trust**: Trust is the basis of the International Data Spaces. Each
    participant is evaluated and certified before being granted access
    to the trusted business ecosystem.

- **Security and data sovereignty**: All components of the
    International Data Spaces rely on state-of-the-art security
    measures. Apart from architectural specifications, security is
    mainly ensured by the evaluation and certification of each technical
    component used in the International Data Spaces. In line with the
    central aspect of ensuring data sovereignty, a data owner in the
    International Data Spaces attaches usage restriction information to
    their data before it is transferred to a data consumer. To use the
    data, the data consumer must fully accept the data owner's usage
    policy.

- **Ecosystem of data**: The architecture of the International Data
    Spaces does not require central data storage capabilities. Instead,
    it pursues the idea of decentralization of data storage, which means
    that data physically remains with the respective data owner until it
    is transferred to a trusted party. This approach requires a
    comprehensive description of each data source and the value and
    usability of data for other companies, combined with the ability to
    integrate domain-specific data vocabularies. In addition, brokers in
    the ecosystem provide services for real-time data search.

- **Standardized interoperability**: The International Data Spaces
    Connector, being a central component of the architecture, is
    implemented in different variants and can be acquired from different
    vendors. Nevertheless, each Connector is able to communicate with
    any other Connector (or other technical component) in the ecosystem
    of the International Data Space.

- **Value adding apps:** The International Data Spaces allows to
    inject apps into the IDS Connectors in order to provide services on
    top of data exchange processes. This includes services for data
    processing, data format alignment, and data exchange protocols, for
    example. Furthermore, data analytics services can be provided by
    remote execution of algorithms.

- **Data markets**: The International Data Space enables the creation
    of novel, data-driven services that make use of data apps. It also
    fosters new business models for these services by providing clearing
    mechanisms and billing functions, and by creating domain-specific
    broker solutions and marketplaces. In addition, the International
    Data Spaces provides templates and other methodological support for
    participants to use when specifying usage restriction information
    and requesting legal information.

**Being the central deliverable of IDSA and the associated research
projects associated with IDSA, the Reference Architecture Model for the
International Data Spaces (IDS-RAM) constitutes the basis for a variety
of software implementations, and thus for a variety of commercial
software products and service offerings.**

**All research and development activities, as well as all activities
with regard to standardization, are driven by the following
guidelines:**

- **Open development process**: The International Data Spaces
    Association is a non-profit organization institutionalized under the
    German law of associations. Every organization is invited to
    participate, as long as it adheres to the common principles of work.

- **Re-use of existing technologies**: Inter-organizational
    information systems, data interoperability, and information security
    are well-established fields of research and development, with plenty
    of technologies available in the market. The work of the
    International Data Spaces initiative is guided by the idea not to
    'reinvent the wheel' , but to use existing technologies (e.g.,
    from the open-source domain) and standards (e.g., semantic standards
    of the W3C) to the extent possible.

- **Contribution to standardization**: Aiming at establishing an
    international standard itself, the International Data Spaces
    initiative supports the idea of standardized architecture stacks.

- **Open Standard**: The IDS-RAM and the specifications associated
    with it are publicly available and open for being used.
