# Participant Information Service (ParIS)

One of the most important value propositions of the IDS is the enablement of business interactions between previously unrelated Participants. That aims in particular at companies that have not met before in the digital or non-digital world but now start business agreements solely relying on the IDS. The therefore necessary trust in the opposite party is technically achieved by a verifiable identity management process through the Identity Provisioning Service and the DAPS. Both components equip each Participant with the necessary attributes and cryptographic proofs for the IDS handshakes. The establishment of a secure and uncompromised communication channel is however only the necessary requirement for a business interaction. In addition, the respective Participants need to understand their opposite’s state in regards of business workflows. For instance, every business actor needs to know its customers tax identification or VAT number to create correct invoices. Furthermore, the registered address is critical to understand the responsible jurisdiction for the unfortunate cases when only courts can solve conflicts.

Such information is provided and maintained by the Support Organization in an IDS, the legal entity that administers the ecosystem. The Support Organization introduces a new Participant by creating its digital identity and at the same time registers security-critical at the DAPS and business-relevant attributes at another technical component. This component is the Participant Information Service. The ParIS provides access to these attributes to the other IDS Participants and components and connects the unique Participant identifier – a URI – with additional metadata. Usually, each IDS ecosystem operates only a small number of ParIS instances, usually only one. IDS Participants therefore know the location where to ask for more information about a potential business partner and can decide whether to start a data exchange.

Different to other IDS components, the trustworthiness of ParIS' provisioned information is not grounded on technical measures, like for instance signatures or certificates, but on the administrative process controlled by the Support Organization. A direct consequence of this process is the necessity that each change request is manually verified before added to the ParIS database.


## Technical Workflow and IDS interactions

The initial population of a Participant entry is conducted directly after the certification and identity creation process is finished. The Support Organization is informed about the successful steps and provided with the corresponding metadata about the new entity. The provisioning of this information is not part of the IDS interactions yet and must be managed through traditional communication measures. The Support Organization checks the correctness of the claims, verifies the information, and equips the dedicated ParIS with the new IDS Participant instance. It is further recommended that each Participant also hosts this self-description on a publicly accessible HTTP server of its choice. Preferably the locator of this self-description document, a HTTP URL, is identical with the used Participant URI. This best practice enables the lookup or dereferencing of the Participant Identifier through every HTTP client and thereby eases the discovery of relevant information. Nevertheless, in case the own supplied Participant self-description and the metadata at the ParIS deviate, the latter is more trusted as its claims have been verified through the Support Organization beforehand. Requests to the ParIS itself follow the IDS Message Model and are described, among others, in the IDS-G and the IDS Information Model.
