# Roles

[TODO: extract content on roles and revise; remove Identity Provider]

Figure [1](#fig:Certification_process){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Certification_process"} outlines the basic structure of
the certification process, together with the roles involved in this
process. The Certification Body and the Evaluation Facility belong to
the "Governance Body" category specified on the Business Layer (see
section 3.1.1). The tasks of these roles with regard to the
certification process are outlined in the following paragraphs. An
in-depth description of their responsibilities can be found in Part 1 of
the White Paper Certification[^2].

It should be noted that all roles described in this section are specific
to the International Data Spaces (i.e. terms such as "Certification
Body" should not be misunderstood to refer to an existing organization
already granting certificates).

![Certification process](./media/image79.png)

## Certification Body

The Certification Body oversees the certification process regarding
quality assurance and framework governance. It defines standard
evaluation procedures and supervises the actions of the Evaluation
Facilities. A certificate is granted only if both the Evaluation
Facility and the Certification Body have come to the conclusion that all
preconditions for certification are fulfilled.

## Evaluation Facility

Contracted by an Applicant (see below), the Evaluation Facility is
responsible for carrying out the detailed technical and/or
organizational evaluation work during a certification process. The
Evaluation Facility issues an evaluation report for the respective
organization/individual or core component, listing details regarding the
evaluation process as well as information regarding the confirmed
security level (the latter determines the depth and scope of the
evaluation activities performed).

The term "Evaluation Facility" refers both to authorized auditors
for management system evaluations (i.e., for participant certifications)
as well as approved evaluators for product evaluations (i.e., for core
component certifications). Hence, the Certification Body oversees and
cooperates with multiple Evaluation Facilities. However, in each
evaluation of an organization/individual or core component only one
Evaluation Facility is involved.

## Applicant

The Applicant is not just the subject of the evaluation and
certification process, but plays an active part in it.

An Applicant needs to actively submit an application to trigger the
certification process. This applies to organizations/individuals that
develop software components intended to be deployed within the
International Data Spaces (i.e., prospective Software Providers) and to
organizations that intend to become IDS Participants.

[TODO: explain the different approaches for Assurance Level 1 and Level 2/3 where EF is involved - not too many details, those will follow in the process chapter 4.2.5]

[^2]: IDSA White Paper Certification -- Framework for the IDS
    Certification Scheme, Version 2.0
    https://www.internationaldataspaces.org/publications/whitepaper-certification/
