# Certification Aspects Addressed by the Different Layers of the IDS-RAM

[TODO: revise]

## Business Layer

The Certification Body and the Evaluation Facility are in charge of the
certification process. Their interactions and responsibilities in this
process are described in section 4.2.2.

Organizations assuming a role under one of the three categories Core
Participant, Intermediary, and Software/Service Provider (see Section
3.1.1) are potential targets of certification. The IDSA Whitepaper
Certification[^1] describes for each role what level of certification is
required and what the focus of the certification is.

## Functional Layer

The functional requirements of the International Data Spaces are the
core requirements expected to be implemented by the technical core
components (e.g., the Connector or the Clearing House). Therefore,
compatibility of each such implementation with these functional
requirements forms the basis of the compliance part of a core
component's certification. The security part of the certification
focuses on security specific requirements. As for the Security
Perspective (see Section 4.1), these security specific requirements are
mainly related to the System Layer.

## Process Layer

Whenever relevant for the compliance part of a component's
certification, a component is also evaluated in terms of whether it
fully supports all processes it is involved in, as defined by the
Reference Architecture Model.

## Information Layer

Certification of a core component comprises also its compliance with the
Reference Architecture Model regarding functionality, protocols, etc.
Whenever relevant, evaluation of a core component's compliance also
refers to its compatibility with the Information Model defined at the
Information Layer.

## System Layer

The System Layer defines the possible interactions between the
components, detailed requirements for the Connector, and specific types
of Connector implementations. The System Layer is the predominant layer
regarding the security part of a component's certification.

[^1]: IDSA White Paper Certification -- Framework for the IDS
    Certification Scheme, Version 2.0
    https://www.internationaldataspaces.org/publications/whitepaper-certification/
