## General Data Protection Regulation ##

Compliance of an organization with the European Union's General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) can only be ensured by the implementation
of both appropriate technical and organizational measures.

For an organization participating in an IDS based ecosystem, the
necessary technical measures for compliance with GDPR are provided by
the software by which the IDS-RAM is implemented. However,
responsibility and accountability with respect to GDPR compliance
remains on the side of the organization itself. This means that the
organization has to implement adequate organizational measures for the
protection of personal data. This set of measures may be set up on the
basis of a risk assessment regarding personal data (processing) and --
if the risk level exceeds a certain threshold -- a data protection
impact assessment.

Consequently, the organizations participating and their data processing
within an IDS-based ecosystem have to be considered for GDPR compliance.
Therefore, it cannot be said in general that IDS-RAM compliance leads to
GDPR compliance. Instead, the role of IDS with regard to GDPR compliance
is to support the participating organization in the implementation of
technical measures and offer advice regarding the implementation of
organizational measures. As a result, the IDS participant is enabled to
implement appropriate measures for GDPR-compliant processing and
transfer of personal data within the scope of the IDS technology and
related features (see also: 
[GDPR-related Requirements and Recommendations for the IDS Reference Architecture Model](https://internationaldataspaces.org/download/16445/).
