## Federated frameworks for data sharing agreements and terms of use ##

IDS provides a federated data-sharing environment that poses strong
requirements with regard to interoperability on each of the levels
distinguished in the new
[European Interoperability Framework](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/nifo-national-interoperability-framework-observatory/european-interoperability-framework-detail)
(as developed by the European Commission ); i.e., legal, organizational,
semantic and technical interoperability, under an overarching integrated
governance approach.

Interoperability of the legal concepts applies to both the data-sharing
agreements (including legal, commercial and service-level conditions)
and the terms of use (i.e., usage contracts consisting of access and
usage policies). In practice, different roles and organizations are
currently emerging to provide services for the administration and
registration of data-sharing agreements and terms of use (under the same
legal umbrella, where appropriate, and specifically for certain
data-sharing communities). Within the current IDS role and interaction
model, distinct roles for managing data-sharing agreements on the one
hand and terms of use on the other hand have not been specified yet.
Nevertheless, supporting such roles in a federated IDS environment is
key to unambiguously understanding and agreement and adequately ensuring
legal compliance of data-sharing transactions taking place between
parties operating in different industries, countries, and/or
jurisdictions. As a result of the co-operation between IDS and
iSHARE, appropriate steps can be taken to address this challenge by
defining the IDS approach to support federation of legal frameworks and
semantic interoperability on legal conditions.
