## Contribution of the International Data Spaces to Industry 4.0 and the Data Economy {#subsec:contribution_to_industry40}

By proposing an architecture for secure data exchange and trusted data
sharing, the International Data Spaces contributes to the design of
enterprise architectures in commercial and industrial digitization
scenarios. It does so by bridging the gaps between research, industrial
stakeholders, political stakeholders, and standards bodies. The
architecture is designed with the objective to overcome the differences
between top-down approaches and bottom-up approaches. Figure
[5](#fig:5_Typical_enterprise_architecture_stack){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:5_Typical_enterprise_architecture_stack"} shows a typical
architecture stack of the digital industrial enterprise. The
International Data Spaces connects the lower-level architectures for
communication and basic data services with more abstract architectures
for smart data services. It therefore supports the establishment of
secure data supply chains from data source to data use, while at the
same time making sure data sovereignty is guaranteed for data owners.


![ Typical enterprise architecture
stack](../media/image16.png){#fig:5_Typical_enterprise_architecture_stack
}


In broadening the perspective from an individual use case scenario to a
platform landscape view, the International Data Spaces positions itself
as an architecture that links different cloud platforms through policies
and mechanisms for secure data exchange and trusted data sharing (or, in
other words, through the principle of data sovereignty).Â 

Over the IDS Connector, the International Data Space's central
component, industrial data clouds, as well as individual enterprise
clouds, on-premises applications and individual, connected devices can
be connected to the International Data Spaces (see Figure
[6](#fig:6_International_Data_Spaces_connecting_different_cloud_platforms){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:6_International_Data_Spaces_connecting_different_cloud_platforms"}).


![ International Data Spaces connecting different cloud
platforms](../media/image17.png){#fig:6_International_Data_Spaces_connecting_different_cloud_platforms
}


With this integrating ambition, the International Data Spaces initiative
positions itself in the context of cognate initiatives on both national
and international level. Founded in Germany, the activities of the
International Data Spaces are closely aligned with Plattform Industrie
4.0, in particular the Reference Architectures, Standards and Norms
working group.

The International Data Spaces initiative has established, and will
continue to establish, liaisons with other initiatives, among them

-   Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation,

-   Big Data Value Association,

-   Data Market Austria,

-   Data Trading Alliance

-   eCl\@ss,

-   FIWARE Foundation,

-   Industrial Internet Consortium,

-   iSHARE

-   Industrial Valuechain Initative

-   OPC Foundation,

-   Plattform Industrie 4.0,

-   Standardization Council Industrie 4.0, and

-   World Wide Web Consortium.

Furthermore, the International Data Spaces initiative seeks
collaboration and exchange of ideas with existing research and
standardization initiatives. By functioning as a mediator between
top-down and bottom-up approaches, bridging the gaps between research,
industry, politics, and standards bodies, aligning the requirements of
the economy and society, and fostering ties with other initiatives, the
International Data Spaces can be considered a unique initiative in the
landscape of *Industry 4.0*.

[^1]: https://www.digitale-technologien.de/DT/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/SSWII_Programmbroschuere.pdf

[^2]: https://www.ishareworks.org/

[^3]: https://www.internationaldataspaces.org/ressource-hub/publications-ids/
