## Industrial Cloud Platforms ##

The growing number of industrial cloud platforms will also drive the
need for a standard for data sovereignty. With a lot of different
platforms emerging -- driven by technology providers, software
companies, system integrators, but also existing intermediaries -- it is
very likely that the platform landscape will be very heterogeneous, at
least for some time. Platform providers will increasingly have to
provide capabilities for secure and trusted data exchange and data
sharing between their own platform and other platforms in the ecosystem.

Furthermore, the cloud platform landscape is likely to be characterized
by a plurality of architectural patterns, ranging from approaches
characterized by a high level of centralization (e.g. data lakes) to
concepts promoting utmost decentralization (e.g. distributed
applications using blockchain technology).

Which platform a data owner or data provider may choose will depend on
the business criticality and the economic value of the data goods they
want to exchange and share. As the data resource of a company consists
of data of different criticality and value, it can be expected that many
companies will use different platforms for different purposes.

To make use of cloud platforms in industrial cases and to maintain data
sovereignty, several preconditions must be fulfilled (especially in use
cases in which different data providers bring together data in one cloud
environment for being analyzed or used). The sovereign decision on a
certain cloud environment must be enabled by interoperability from the
perspective of data and from the perspective of the underlying software
(i.e., portability of a service into different cloud environments). In
addition, the capabilities of the service and the runtime must be
transparent and verifiable to establish trust in the cloud environment
to be used. To achieve and maintain interoperability and trust among the
parties connected via a cloud environment, a governance model must be
established and enforced with regard to technology, operational and
administrative processes, and legal agreements.
