## PUBLISHING AND USING DATA APPS

Data Apps can be used by Connectors for specific data processing or data transformation tasks. They can perform tasks of different complexity, ranging from simple data transformation to complex data analytics. An example of data transformation may be a Data App parsing a single string field with address information and producing a data structure consisting of street name and number, zip code, name of the city, and name of the country.

On a conceptual level, Data Apps can be treated the same way as data offerings in the International Data Spaces. Just remember, data is provided by a Data Provider using a Connector and registering this Connector at a Broker. Data Apps are created by an App Provider and registered at an App Store. The App Provider's Connector is used as a means to communicate with the App Store. As a consequence, App Providers also need to undergo the Onboarding process. However, instead of registering their Connector at a Broker, App Providers register their Data Apps at an App Store.

In order to be published, certain Data Apps require certification from the Certification Body (see [Section 4.2](../../4_Perspectives_of_the_Reference_Architecture_Model/4_2_Certification_Perspective)) (first step of the process shown in [Figure 3.12](../../media/image29.png)). When it comes to using a Data App that is offered by an App Store, App Users (Data Provider or Data Consumer) need to execute a process that is very similar to the ['Exchange Data' process](3_3_4_Exchanging_Data.md) described above.

For each Data App that was successfully certified, the corresponding metadata that confirms to the IDS Information Model is managed and stored in the App Store for being retrieved by users (e.g., Data Consumers or Data Providers) via a search interface. Searching for a Data App is part of the ['Find App' sub process](../../media/image30.jpeg). If a user finds a suitable Data App (i.e., matching in functionality and compatible with the user's Connector packaging format) in the App Store, the App can be requested. This is indicated in the 'Retrieve App' sub process, which is conceptually identical with the 'Invoke Data Operation' process outlined in [Section 3.3.4](../3_4_Information_Layer).
